# 5.5 Cluster Client
An actor system that is not part of the cluster can communicate with actors somewhere in the cluster via this ClusterClient. The client can of course be part of another cluster. It only needs to know the location of one (or more) nodes to use as initial contact points. It will establish a connection to a ClusterReceptionist somewhere in the cluster. It will monitor the connection to the receptionist and establish a new connection if the link goes down. When looking for a new receptionist it uses fresh contact points retrieved from previous establishment, or periodically refreshed contacts, i.e. not necessarily the initial contact points.

Note: ClusterClient should not be used when sending messages to actors that run within the same clus- ter. Similar functionality as the ClusterClient is provided in a more efficient way by Distributed Publish Subscribe in Cluster for actors that belong to the same cluster.

Also, note it’s necessary to change akka.actor.provider akka.actor.LocalActorRefProvider to akka.remote.RemoteActorRefProvider akka.cluster.ClusterActorRefProvider when using the cluster client.

from or

The receptionist is supposed to be started on all nodes, or all nodes with specified role, in the cluster. The receptionist can be started with the ClusterClientReceptionist extension or as an ordinary actor.

You can send messages via the ClusterClient to any actor in the cluster that is regis- tered in the DistributedPubSubMediator used by the ClusterReceptionist. The ClusterClientReceptionist provides methods for registration of actors that should be reachable from the client. Messages are wrapped in ClusterClient.Send, ClusterClient.SendToAll or ClusterClient.Publish.

1. ClusterClient.Send

The message will be delivered to one recipient with a matching path, if any such exists. If several entries match the path the message will be delivered to one random destination. The sender() of the message can specify that local affinity is preferred, i.e. the message is sent to an actor in the same local actor system as the used receptionist actor, if any such exists, otherwise random to any other matching entry.

2. ClusterClient.SendToAll

The message will be delivered to all recipients with a matching path.

3. ClusterClient.Publish

The message will be delivered to all recipients Actors that have been registered as subscribers to the named topic.

Response messages from the destination actor are tunneled via the receptionist to avoid inbound connections from other cluster nodes to the client, i.e. the sender(), as seen by the destination actor, is not the client itself. The sender() of the response messages, as seen by the client, is deadLetters since the client should normally send subsequent messages via the ClusterClient. It is possible to pass the the original sender inside the reply messages if the client is supposed to communicate directly to the actor in the cluster.

While establishing a connection to a receptionist the ClusterClient will buffer messages and send them when the connection is established. If the buffer is full the ClusterClient will drop old messages when new messages are sent via the client. The size of the buffer is configurable and it can be disabled by using a buffer size of 0.

It’s worth noting that messages can always be lost because of the distributed nature of these actors. As always, additional logic should be implemented in the destination (acknowledgement) and in the client (retry) actors to ensure at-least-once message delivery.

##5.5.1 An Example

On the cluster nodes first start the receptionist. Note, it is recommended to load the extension when the actor system is started by defining it in the akka.extensions configuration property:

```
akka.extensions = ["akka.cluster.client.ClusterClientReceptionist"]
```
Next, register the actors that should be available for the client.

runOn(host1) { val serviceA = system.actorOf(Props[Service], "serviceA") ClusterClientReceptionist(system).registerService(serviceA) }

runOn(host2, host3) { val serviceB = system.actorOf(Props[Service], "serviceB") ClusterClientReceptionist(system).registerService(serviceB) }

On the client you create the ClusterClient actor and use it as a gateway for sending messages to the actors identified by their path (without address information) somewhere in the cluster.

runOn(client) { val c = system.actorOf(ClusterClient.props(

ClusterClientSettings(system).withInitialContacts(initialContacts)), "client") c ! ClusterClient.Send("/user/serviceA", "hello", localAffinity = true) c ! ClusterClient.SendToAll("/user/serviceB", "hi") }

The initialContacts parameter is a Set[ActorPath], which can be created like this:

val initialContacts = Set( ActorPath.fromString("akka.tcp://OtherSys@host1:2552/system/receptionist"), ActorPath.fromString("akka.tcp://OtherSys@host2:2552/system/receptionist")) val settings = ClusterClientSettings(system) .withInitialContacts(initialContacts)

You will probably define the address information of the initial contact points in configuration or system property. See also Configuration.

A more comprehensive sample is available in the Typesafe Activator tutorial named Distributed workers with Akka and Scala!.

##5.5.2 ClusterClientReceptionist Extension

In the example above the receptionist is akka.cluster.client.ClusterClientReceptionist

started and extension.

accessed That

is

with the convenient
and perfectly fine in most cases, but it can be good to know that it is possible to start the akka.cluster.client.ClusterReceptionist actor as an ordinary actor and you can have sev- eral different receptionists at the same time, serving different types of clients.

Note that the ClusterClientReceptionist uses the DistributedPubSub extension, which is de- scribed in Distributed Publish Subscribe in Cluster.

It is recommended to load the extension when the actor system is started by defining it in the akka.extensions configuration property:

```
akka.extensions = ["akka.cluster.client.ClusterClientReceptionist"]
```
##5.5.3 Dependencies

To use the Cluster Client you must add the following dependency in your project.

sbt:

```
"com.typesafe.akka" %% "akka-cluster-tools" % "2.4.1"
```
maven:

```xml
<dependency> 
	<groupId>com.typesafe.akka</groupId> 
	<artifactId>akka-cluster-tools_2.11</artifactId> 
	<version>2.4.1</version> 
</dependency>
```

##5.5.4 Configuration

The ClusterClientReceptionist extension (or ClusterReceptionistSettings) can be config- ured with the following properties:

```sbt
# Settings for the ClusterClientReceptionist extension 
akka.cluster.client.receptionist { 
	# Actor name of the ClusterReceptionist actor, /system/receptionist 
	name = receptionist
	
	# Start the receptionist on members tagged with this role. 
	# All members are used if undefined or empty. 
	role = ""
	
	# The receptionist will send this number of contact points to the client 
	number-of-contacts = 3
	
	# The actor that tunnel response messages to the client will be stopped 
	# after this time of inactivity. 
	response-tunnel-receive-timeout = 30s
	
	# The id of the dispatcher to use for ClusterReceptionist actors. 
	# If not specified default dispatcher is used. 
	# If specified you need to define the settings of the actual dispatcher. 
	use-dispatcher = ""
}
```
The following configuration properties are read by the ClusterClientSettings when created with a ActorSystem parameter. It is also possible to amend the ClusterClientSettings or create it from another config section with the same layout as below. ClusterClientSettings is a parameter to the ClusterClient.props factory method, i.e. each client can be configured with different settings if needed.

```sbt
# Settings for the ClusterClient 
akka.cluster.client { 
	# Actor paths of the ClusterReceptionist actors on the servers (cluster nodes) 
	# that the client will try to contact initially. It is mandatory to specify 
	# at least one initial contact. 
	# Comma separated full actor paths defined by a string on the form of 
	# "akka.tcp://system@hostname:port/system/receptionist" 
	initial-contacts = []
	
	# Interval at which the client retries to establish contact with one of 
	# ClusterReceptionist on the servers (cluster nodes) 
	establishing-get-contacts-interval = 3s
	
	# Interval at which the client will ask the ClusterReceptionist for 
	# new contact points to be used for next reconnect. 
	refresh-contacts-interval = 60s
	
	# How often failure detection heartbeat messages should be sent 
	heartbeat-interval = 2s
	
	# Number of potentially lost/delayed heartbeats that will be 
	# accepted before considering it to be an anomaly. 
	# The ClusterClient is using the akka.remote.DeadlineFailureDetector, which 
	# will trigger if there are no heartbeats within the duration 
	# heartbeat-interval + acceptable-heartbeat-pause, i.e. 15 seconds with 
	# the default settings. 
	acceptable-heartbeat-pause = 13s
	
	# If connection to the receptionist is not established the client will buffer 
	# this number of messages and deliver them the connection is established. 
	# When the buffer is full old messages will be dropped when new messages are sent 
	# via the client. Use 0 to disable buffering, i.e. messages will be dropped 
	# immediately if the location of the singleton is unknown. 
	# Maximum allowed buffer size is 10000. 
	buffer-size = 1000
}
```


